---
layout: post
title: Table Saw Blade Tools
---
The tablesaw that's in my shop belonged first to my dad. In fact, I remember it
very vividly from my childhood. When I first got it, it hadn't been used in
about 10 years and the blade that was in it was very much worse for the wear. I
thought it a good occasion to make a few tools from the blade.

{% include image.html page=page id='01.jpg' %}

# Squares

Many of us have seen and drooled at those fancy squares for sale at the
specialty woodworking stores. Lovely, to be sure, so why not make your own? I
roughly cut the saw blade to provide as long a bar as possible, approximately
1" wide. I then cut it into two pieces, one shorter than the other to make two
different squares.

Each of these bars could then be independently flattened at the disk sander.
Once perfectly square and straight and of a consistent width, I could then make
the wooden part. I cut a piece of padauk, then glued on a brass front. I wanted
one side of the brass glued on first so that when I cut the slot for the blade,
it would be lined up perfectly with the one cut in the wood. After that cut was
made, I could glue on the opposing brass piece.

I then epoxied the blade in place, taking extreme care to ensure that it was
perfectly square. Once cured, I could slowly drill the holes for pins through
the whole piece. Or so I thought.

The heat from the drilling process affected the epoxy and the blade came out.
Fortunately, at least there was enough of an impression from the drill bit that
I could drill the blade all the way through, as well as on the wood. I repeated
the procedure for the two other holes dry, but with the pin placed in the first
hole.

With enough time, oil, and patience, I was able to get through the extremely
tough saw blade and glued the pins in. When sanding the steel pins flush, I had
a similar problem as when trying to drill out for the pins -- heat is epoxy's
enemy. The solution here was to just not let the workpiece get too hot and take
my time sanding.

Despite all the frustration, I did end up with two beautiful (and perfectly
square) tools.

{% include image.html page=page id='02.jpg' %}

{% include image.html page=page id='03.jpg' %}

# Marking Knife

Following a procedure similar to that of the squares for getting a flat bar, I
cut out the blank for this knife. One straight and perfect, I ground in an angle
I found pleasing on the disk sander, followed by a bevel.

Drilling the holes for the pins went a little more smoothly given the lessons
learned from the squares, but was still time-consuming. Some slightly shaped
scales, pins, epoxy and sanding, and I had a nice new marking gauge.

{% include image.html page=page id='04.jpg' %}

{% include image.html page=page id='05.jpg' %}

# Awl

While not actually made from the table saw blade, this piece was of the same
vintage. It began with an old screwdriver mounted into the lathe by mounting a
piece of wood in the chuck and drilling a hole slightly undersized for the
screwdriver and forcing it in. With the lathe turning at its slowest speed, an
angle grinder made quick work of bringing it to a point. Be careful here to
allow the workpiece to cool as you do.

The handle itself was simple enough. After turning the side nearest the blade,
I mounted it on a jam chuck to finish the end of the handle.

{% include image.html page=page id='06.jpg' %}

# Card Scraper

I figured that the tablesaw blade would be a suitable material for a card
scraper. It was really mostly a matter of flattening three of the sides and
putting a nice contour on the last one. In practice, however, it is of course
quite stiff and not really practical. I did make pretty holder for it, so I
suppose it can enjoy its obsolescence in style.

{% include image.html page=page id='07.jpg' %}

{% include image.html page=page id='08.jpg' %}

# Bevel Gauge

After cutting a straight even bar from the blade, I cut the bar at an angle and
flattened each of the sides at the disk sander until they mated perfectly. The
shorter side was eventually glued in between two pieces of wood, meant to act
as a stop for the swinging blade. The longer side had a hole drilled in it to
accept a bolt topped by a wing-nut to secure it. For security, the short side
also got a pin.

Both sides were sanded round, centered around the bold and the pin respectively.

{% include image.html page=page id='09.jpg' %}

# Knife

Saving the best for last, I made a knife for my parents. I began by shaping the
blank with files for interior curves and the disk sander where possible. To put
a bevel on the blade, I clamped it to a piece of wood and to the bench sticking
straight out towards me. Instinctually, it doesn't seem to be the wisest thing,
but the idea is that the piece of wood extends as far as the blade so there's
no risk of impaling oneself.

A small board wrapped in sandpaper and copious amounts of elbow grease and oil
eventually get a bevel formed. Then I proceeded to work my way through the grits
to get to a nice sheen.

For the scales, I drilled holes through the blade, used those to mark for the
pins on two pieces of wood. Once drilled, I could put the pins through
temporarily so I could trace the outline of the tang to roughly cut away the
excess. I then removed the tang and held the two scaled together with pins to
shape their tops at the same time on the disk sander since they would be
inaccessible once glued up.

I epoxied the scaled on, and the pins in place and let it set up overnight.
After curing, I could sand and file, file and sand until the scales met evenly
with the tang, and could give a nice grippy profile to the handle.

It was a lot of work, especially to get all the scratch marks removed
everywhere, but the result is better than I had originally thought I was capable
of. So few projects turn out that way.

{% include image.html page=page id='10.jpg' %}

{% include image.html page=page id='11.jpg' %}
