---
layout: post
title: Fire Extinguisher Bells
---
A couple of years ago I saw some bells made from very large gas cylinders and
wanted to do the same. Such large cylinders rarely come up on Craigslist, and
when they do, they're usually quite expensive.

Instead, I decided to try on some fire extinguishers that someone was getting
rid of. They were all the dry chemical style, which was a little bit tricky to
clean off -- while I could unscrew the heads and empty them into a trash bag,
cleaning out the insides was a different matter. The chemical seems to be
moderately hydrophobic, making it difficult to just rinse out.

Once they were finally cleaned, I used a hack saw to cut each off near the
bottom at an angle. This was surprisingly easy, holding them in a tail vise.
After cutting the bottoms off, I stapled some sandpaper sheets to a flat piece
scrap wood and used it to ensure the cutoff was one perfect plane. The two
aluminum ones went very quickly, but the steel one took considerably longer.

I chose to give one a metallic look, for which I used 40-grit sandpaper on an
angle grinder. It make _very_ quick work of the coating. I had tried sanding by
hand, or even using acetone to dissolve it, but the angle grinder was definitely
the way to go. Once finished, it got several coats of clear lacquer to protect
against developing a patina.

![]({{ site.github.url }}/assets/2016/08/fire-extinguisher-bells/01.jpg)

Another I left with just its original coating. I had some stray marks with
sharpie, which I was able to mostly remove with acetone. However, the solvent
had an effect on the paint as well, making it more matte in the areas I rubbed
down.

![]({{ site.github.url }}/assets/2016/08/fire-extinguisher-bells/02.jpg)

The third one got coated with a spray paint designed to look like hammered
metal. This, by far, was my favorite finish.

![]({{ site.github.url }}/assets/2016/08/fire-extinguisher-bells/03.jpg)

To attach them to a hook, I got bottle stoppers that fit snugly in the top and
drilled a hole in each to receive an eyelet. In fact, a large fender washer goes
on top and below the stopper, with the eyelet extending through. A large
coupling nut secures the washer in place, and connects to a second eyelet inside
the bell to hold the clapper.
