---
layout: post
title: Owl Cake
---
Several years ago I began making cakes for special occasions. One of my stated
goals was to be able to make really neat cakes for my daughter's birthday. While
I'm not yet where I would like to be in that regard, this was the next in my
attempt to make better cakes.

The chocolate cake recipe on the back of the Hershey's dark cocoa is quite good,
and so that's what I used as the cake part. After letting the two 9" rounds
cool, I added some frosting to join them, and then frosted the whole thing with
vanilla buttercream. I always have problems making it as smooth as I would like,
and this time was no exception.

After reading some more on the subject, it seems like the best way to solve this
problem is to first add the crumb layer and put it in the fridge. Once cooled,
add a second layer and to continue to smooth it with an icing smoother, and
ideally a revolving cake decorating stand. Something to try next time.

After frosting, I put it back in the fridge to cool overnight before applying
the fondant. I always make marshmallow fondant and it turns out alright. The
application of the fondant over the top is always stressful. It's best to wrap
it up over a rolling pin and then unroll it over the cake. The difficulty comes
when it comes time to reconcile the fact that it's a 2-dimensional roll of
fondant being applied over a 3-dimensional cake. Getting the sides smooth and
_without_ creases is an endless source of frustration for me. I suppose I just
need more practice.

I had in mind making an owl cake, given my daughter's love for the animal. While
food coloring works fine to actually color the fondant, the process of mixing it
in consistently is messy and frustrating. I can't seem to get it to soak in well
enough before I start kneading it in such that it doesn't just squelch out of
every fold of the fondant, squirting food coloring everywhere.

Still, the children seemed to mostly like the cake.

![]({{ site.github.url }}/assets/2017/03/owl-cake/01.jpg)
