---
layout: post
title: Emergency Preparedness
---
I finally got around to making my emergency preparedness kits. With the looming
thread of earthquakes that may or may not materialize in my lifetime, I will
sleep better at night knowing these kits are put together.

My kit was informed by information provided by
[Seattle](http://www.seattle.gov/emergency-management) and the
[Red Cross](http://www.redcross.org/get-help/prepare-for-emergencies/be-red-cross-ready).
The recommendation is to have provisions for 7-10 days for the household, so I
used that as my guiding light. And as a constraint, the whole kit needed to fit
inside of a 12-gallon container (this way it's all together in the event of
evacuation and also doesn't take up too much space in my house).

In terms of calories, I put together about 25k calories for myself and my
daughter, which would be livable if not the most pleasant thing in the world.
And in most situations we'd still have access to the food in our pantry.

In terms of water, I set aside just 1.5 gallons of bottled water, but also
described other sources of water -- ice cubes, toilet tank (not to be confused
with the bowl), and water heater. I also included instructions about how to make
use of the water in the water heater, as well as several sterilization
protocols in addition to the lifestraw I put in my kit.

![]({{ site.github.url }}/assets/2017/06/emergency-preparedness/01.jpg)

I also included many of the common things recommended for such a kit -
flashlights, batteries, first aid kits, radio, multitool, and so on. Since I
have a child, I also made sure to put in diapers and wet wipes. I also figured
it would be helpful to have copies of essential documents (passports and the
like).

One thing that I was particularly pleased with was putting together a small
introduction paper to go in the kit (laminated, of course). It begins with the
first steps to do when disaster strikes -- shut off gas, shut off water main,
check for damage, injuries, etc. Adjacent to the kit is the tool to shut off the
water main, and included in the kit is a wrench to shut off the gas so that I
don't have to look around for one. This document also describes additional
resources to get in the event of evacuation.

I put together a second kit for the car, though that only has three days of
provisions and additional supplies that are car-specific. For instance a tire
patch kit, small air compressor, emergency jump starter, durable shoes, etc.

The second thing that I'm pleased with is that each kit's manifest describes the
regular maintenance to be performed to keep the kits up to date. For example,
making sure that spare clothes still fit, checking the expiration date of the
foodstuffs, and recharging backup batteries. For each of these, I also set up
calendar reminders.
